## The Second SElf: *Machines and the Human Spirit*

**Keywords**: Computers; Discource; Metaphors; Cold War

**Authors**: Paul Edwards

**Date of Publication**: 1997

**Reference**: Edwards, P. N. (1997). The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War America (Reprint edition). Cambridge, Mass. London: The MIT Press.


#### Key Concepts
----

1. ***Discourse:*** Edwards positions his term *discourse* as similar though not quite the same as an ideology (Raymond Williams), a paradigm (Kuhn), a worldview (old sociology of knowledge) nor a social construction (Pinch and Bijker). Rather, Edwards positions a *discourse* as a self-elaborating "heterogeneous ensemble" that combines techniques and technologies, metaphors, language, practices, and fragments of other discourses around a support of supports. It produces both power and knoweldge: individual and institutional behavior, facts, logic, and the authority that reinforces it. It does this by continually maintaining and elaborating "supports", developing what amounts to discursive infrastructure. It also continually expands its own scope, occupying and integrating coneptual space in a kind of discursive imperialism. Edwards states that discourse goes beyond mere speech acts and refers to the entire field of *signifying* or *meaningful practices*: those social interactions—material, institutional, and linguistic—through which reality is interpreted and constructed for us and with which human knowledge is produced and reproduced. A discrouse, then, is a way of knowledge, a background of assumptions and agreements about reality supported by paradigmatic metaphors, techniques, and technologies and potentially embodied in social institutions. This idea of a discourse is similar to Wittgenstein's "Language Games" and wirtings of Foucault. 

2. ***Closed world:*** Drawn from literary theory, a "closed world" is a radically bounded scene of conflict and referntial space wherein every thought, word, and action is ultimately direced back toward a central struggle. This term was originally used to describe certain literary story structures wherin the scope of the story was constrained to a single location, and often featured characters struggling with themselves and others. A closed world was one that was divided against itself, and consumed, but also defined by a total apocalyptic threat. However, Edwards frames his 'closed world' as ideological. In particular, he argues that the Cold War turned the whole world into a closed world, wherin all actions were framed in terms of the central struggle between capitalism and communism, and under the threat of nuclear weapons, and from which there was no escape (except for fleeting fantasies of space travel). 

3. ***Cyborg:*** These (sometimes real, sometimes hypothetical) figures blend organic and machine elements, forming orgnaisms like artifically augmented bodies, human-machine systems, artificial intelligences, and human-integrated computer systems. The term emerged from popular culture and continues to pervade it, but the terms popularity in STS came from Donna Haraway's *Cyborg Manifesto* wherein she discussed the notion of the cyborg as a breaker of boundaries, and thus a figure for women's liberation. Edwards also uses this term to discuss the ways in which computational and systems thinking influence popular imaginations and even psychological research. In doing, Edwards draws on Sherry Turkle's idea of the *Second Self*. 

4. ***Closed World Discource:*** Describes the language, technologies, and practices that together supported the visions of centrally controlled, and automated global power at the heart of American Cold War politics. Computers help to create and maintain this discourse by making possible such central real-time military control systems, and also by facilitating a metophorical understanding of world politics as s sort of system subject to technological management. This kind of discourse was charactersizes by certain techniques, technologies, practices, experiences, fictions, and languages (discussed mroe in depth on page 15). 

5. ***Cyborg Discourse:*** This discourse is primarily concerned with the psychological and cultural changes in self-imaging brought on by the computer metaphor. Typically, it focuses on the psychological, metaphorical, and pholosophical aspects of computer use rather than their plitical, social, and material dimensions. While closed world discourse is build around the computer's capacities as tools, cybord discourse focuses on the computer's mind-like characteristics and its generation of self-understanding through metaphor, as explored in Turkle's *Second Self*. Like closed world discourse, cyborg discourse can also be political, though the politics more often relate to social-cultural issues rather than to the government. For example, the movie *Terminator* explored a cultures anxieties of nuclear war, automation, and even examined gender norms. Similarly, Donna Haraway uses cyborg discourse in her famous works to discuss gender binaries. 

6. ***Computer:*** An object that serves as a tool, a metaphor, and an element of discourse. As a tool, computers are unique in their generizability they can stores and execute arbitrary programs and can manipulate any kind of symbolic information. Due in part to their flexibility and special nature as an information machine, machines have become a culturallt central metaphor for control, for scientific analysis, and for the mind. Like the clock, computers also serves as a metaphor that shapes our language and even our understandings of the world. However, Edwards argues that computers are not just language metaphors, but also experiential and material metaphors, which is how computers become political entities. Moreover, Edwards argues that computers serve as a central *support* for discourses, such as closed-world discourse. Computers, as a discourse, views technology as one focus of a social process in which impacts choices, experiences, metaphors, and environments all play a part.

7. ***Metaphor:*** Edwards uses metaphors to mean far more than a rhetorical device. Rather, metaphors mediate the relationships among language, thought, and experience. All metaphors are politicol in the sense that they focus attention on some aspects of a situation or experience at the experience of others. But metaphors are also political in a stronger sense—some metaphors become so entrenched that they begin to direct many other systems of description, becoming "master tropes". Such master tropes include "TIME IS MONEY" and "BODY IS MACHINE"—these metaphors shape knowledge and behavior. Metaphors are part of the flesh and thought of culture, not merely a thin communative skin. Therefore, the politics of culture is, very largely, the politics of metaphors, and so the investigation of the computer of the metaphor for the mind must examine the cultural dimensions of the computer metaphor. Edwards continues to expans on the idea of the computer as a metaphor by building on Turkle's work, who argued that computers, more than other technologies, were "objects to think with". The computer metaphor also contribuets to our understanding of the mind, spawning such ideas as "the brain is hardware", "the mind is software", "thinking is computing", "memory is looking up stored data", etc. In this way, computers helped contribute to congnitive science and cyborg discource. 


#### Questions
----

***What is the main argument of the text?***

At its most basic, this book is about the emergence of digital computing and their shaping of and by culture, society, and politics during this time. In his opening chapter, Paul Edwards states that his book is about computers as machines and metaphors during the Cold War, and he goes on to argue about the effects of Cold War politics on computers, and the computer's effects on Cold War politics. Moreover, he argues that “we can make sense of the history of computers as tools only when we simultaneously grasp their history as metaphors in Cold War science, politics, and culture". His book offers three main theses (pg 2):

1. First, I will argue that the historical trajectory of computer development cannot be separated from the elaboration of american grand strategy
2. Second, I will link the rise of cognitivism, in both psychology and artificial intellegence, to social networks and computers projects formed for World War II and the Cold War
3. Finally, I will suggest that cyborg discourse functioned at the psychological/subjective counterpart of closed-world politics" 

In elaborating on the history of computers during the Cold War, Edwards pushes towards a "mutual shaping" understanding of science and technology. He works to "balance problems in the social construction of technology with their converse, which is to say the technological construction of social worlds" (pg 34)

He frames the social, political, and cultural dimensions of computers as *discourses*, a heterogeneous ensemble of technologies, techniques, languages, and more which are used to structure and frame actions and statements. 

***Describe the structure of the text.***

The first chapter of the book lays out Edwards' theoretical frameworks for understanding the  emergence of digital computing during the Cold War. This chapter discusses such concepts as *the closed world*, *closed world* and *cyborg* discourses, and "the computer as metaphor". The theoretical argumetns of this book are largely contained within this chapter. The following three chapters go on to describe the history of closed world discourse, specifically in regards to the creation of the Eniac and the military's role in computer research, the ambitions, practicalities, and implications of the SAGE missile defense system, and the visions of a centralized and controllable "electronic battlefield" before and during the Vietnam war. 

The second half of the book begins with an "interlude" (chapter 5) in which Edwards outlines his theoretical framework for *metaphors* and discusses the role of computers as metaphors for the mind. This chapter also marks the turning point towards discussing *cyborg* discourse, rather than *closed world* discourse. Edwards argues that closed world and cyborg discourse collabroate in producing the closed world, but he also shows how cyborg discourse is based moreso on the metaphorical power of computers as thinking and information machines. In the second half of the book, Edwards discusses the rise of psychology and corresponding rise on cybernetics psychoology during World War II, the work of two famous labs and personas pushing the idea of human-machine integration, and the military interest in, and political discourse of artificial intellegence research. 

The final two chapters of the book push the history slightly forward, examining *closed world* and *cyborg* discours emore broadly in the context of Reagan-era Cold War politisc, and later in the 1980s science fiction and emerging cyberpunk novels. These chapters demonstrate the subjective nature of closed world discourse, wherin each fiction serves as a representative of cognitive space that was active during this time. THe last chapter also explores the iconography of the closed world by focusing on such cultural items as the movies *Terminator* and *Blade Runner*, and the emerging cyberpunk novel *Neuromancer*. 

***Describe the main literatures that the text draws on and contributes to, and the particular contribution made by the text.***

Edwards draws on a wide range of literature to support his arguments. The concept of discourse, which is central to the text, is largely build on the idea of "discourse" put forth by Foucault—he also draws on Wittgenstein, Kuhn, Pinch & Bijker, and more in order to support and position this concept. 

When discussing the cognitive aspects of computing, Edwards draws largely on Sherry Turkle's ideas of the *second self* and the idea of the computer being a *tool to think with*. Here, and when discussing *cyborg discourse*, Edwards also cites Haraway's figurative *cyborg*. 

The text situates itself largely as a history of technology, but also as a history that sits firmly within the field of Science and Technology studies. One of its main contributions is the expansion beyond the traditional history of ideas or history of inventors. Rather, this book serves more as a history of metaphors and discourse, and thus a history of politics. 


***Describe the methodology (or methodologies) used in the text, and how it enables the author(s) to support the text’s main argument.***

This text relies on historical analysis and what I assume to be largely archival research. However, he also cites a range of secondary sources (I think thats the right term? Citing people who write about a history) as well as primary sources. 

***Describe at least three of the text’s themes or topics that are of general interest in STS.***

1. Edwards' idea of *discourses* is incredibly relevant to STS, and in particular to understanding the cultural and political domensions of science and technology. Edwards draws this idea from Foucault, but does a great job elaborating on it and framing it against other related ideas. The ideas of *closed world* and *cyborg* discourse are both valuable in and of themselves, but can also be easily expanded to other concents. What about *innovation discourse* or *connectedness (as in social media) discourse*?
2. A history of the emergence of computers during the cold war, especially one which takes into consideration the range of political actors and stakeholders, as well as the computer's cultural significance, is incredibly relevant to STS. As far as I am aware, this is one of the first histories to explore these ideas, and in so doing presents an alternative history of the computer, one that draws attention to the involvement of the Milirary and the politics of the Cold War. 
3. I personally enjoyed, and I know many STS scholars would also, the chapter on the cultural iconography of the cold war. I think that it did a good job of linking examples of high-profile artifacts of popular culture to the key theses of the book. I also think that Science Fiction is all too often looked over or dismissed in *serious* STS work, but I think it marks a key aspect of cultural beliefs on science and technology, and potential world futures.

***What quotes capture the critical significance of the text?***

1. "This book is built on an implicit critique of existing computer historiography. Instead of progress and revolution, the plot structure I shall use emphasizes conginency and multiple determination. I shall cast technological change as technological choice, tying it to political choices and socially constituted values at every level, rendering technology as a product of complex interactions among scientists and engineers, funding agencies, government policies, ideologies, and cultural frames" (pg xiii)

2. "The Cold War's portent as an economic and material fact could not be grasped apart from its metaphorical and cultural dimensions. Weapons of war were also understoof to be focal elements of the economy, of national politics, and of scientific research. Computers were a primary example of this inseparability of weapon from tool, tool from metaphor, and metaphor from political action. They were a key factor in the massive increases in the speed and scale of warfare through their implementations in systems designed for air defense, military command and control, data analysis, and satellite surveillance and, from the eraly 1960's, as components of self-guided 'smart' weapons such as guided missiles, cruise missiles, and advanced jet aircraft. **But computers were also of immense symbolic and practical importance in the ideological worlds of the Cold War and the Vietnam War**, for which they represented a potential for total oversight, exacting standards of control, and technical-rational solutions to a myryad of complex problems" (pg 15)

3. "Closed-world discourse helped guide U.S. military policy into an extremt reliance on computers and other high-technology weapons. It also supported many U.S. attempts to manipulate world politics. Cyborg discourse collaborated with closed-world discourse both materially, when artificla intelligence technologies and human/machine integration techniques were used for military purposes, and metaphorically, by creating an interpretation of the inner world of human psychology as a closed and technically manipulable system. Cyborg discourse is the discourse of human automata: of cybernetic organisms for whom the human/machine boundary has been erased. Closed-world discourse represents the form of politics for such beings: a politics of the theorization and control of systems. Thus the third theme of this book is the interactive construction of facts through the creation of iconographies and political subject positions—maps of meaning, possible subjectives, narrative frames—within the framatic spaces of the closed world" (pg 27)

4. "Thus, the direct entailments of different metaphors for he mind point to radically different sets of questions, ethics positions, and views of human nature. The kinds of questions scientists should ask,the kinds of moralityappropriate to the corresponding concepts of human nature, and the sorts of expectations human beings might reasonably have of each other under the three schemes (Human as Reflex Machine, Human as Hydraulic System, and Human as Computer) are quite different (although not in every respect). As usual, each metaphor draws attention to certain features of the domain of the mental, obscures others, and through its elaboration may actually generate new forms of experience" (pg 164)

5. "Computers combined, in a singular potent icon, the artificality of the closed-world setting, the power of technology, and the limitations of rationality and logic. At the same time, computer simulations—AI, Rand strategic simulations, cyberspace—formed true closed worlds, entirely within the machine, which could threaten to engulf or replace the larger world they initially sought only to model. Computers embodied the abstraction, the distinction, and the superhuman speed of high-technology war, as well as the calculative rationality of nuclear strategic planning. With AI, computers could bridge the gap between iconic representation and psychological experience: they could attain a subjectivity of their own. Computers, computerized robots, and cyborgs became subjects: speaking, active agents." (pg 312-313)


#### Relevance to my research
----


#### Other Notes
----
