## Little Science Big Science

#### Authors: Derek de Solla Price
#### Date of Publlication: 1963

#### *Citation*
Price, D. J. d. S. (1963). Little science, big science. New York,: Columbia University Press.Overview


#### Descriptive Summary

Derek De Solla Price’s Little Science, Big Science
It’s a collection of lectures about the state of science, as Price sees it in 1963, focusing on the size of the profession, its exponential growth and speculations about its future. And also, discussions of how the increasing size of science, which has developed into a well-established “big science” in the US affects the structure of the field and the rates and types of scientific work, discovery and development.
Great quip. Communication of scientific findings is a secondary goal of scientific papers. They’re a social device for staking out intellectual property. Exact quotation: “If then, the prototype of the modern scientific paper is a social device rather than a technique for cumulating quanta of information, what strong force called it into being and kept it alive? Beyond a doubt, the motive was the establishment and maintenance of intellectual property” (65)Chapter summaries1: Prologue to a science of science
Price discusses the “immediacy of science” that characterizes the modern age—the fact that since the size of science is increasing and the pace of science is accelerating as a result, most of the major scientific developments in human civilization have happened in the last 50 years and most of the scientists ever are still alive now. The pace of science is accelerating, and as a side-effect, the number of papers and the numbers of new scientists are also increasing exponentially. Now, wer’re in the era of big science, the past (and in countries that do not have developed big-science infrastructure) are in the era of little science. Price sees World War II as the easy benchmark for the start of big science in the US, but I find that he’s unclear about why…is it a convenient periodization thing or is there actually something that he things touched off big science. he makes some gestures there, but it’s not well developed or convincing.
However, the exponential expansion of science cannot continue forever. There will have to be a point when the growth slows down, when there’s a saturation of science, and then maybe there will be stability. Price looks for and discusses various models that show exponential increase followed by saturation and levelling off, and he sees several possible ways that saturation might start to manifest itself—certain signs that science may be getting saturated. There may be fluctuations near saturation before the levelling of, or it may be gradual. It’s unclear when saturation will be reached, but at the current pace, soon the entire population will be scientists, which would be silly.2: Galton revisited
The most eugenics-curious chapter, as he tries to investigate how many people could be eminent scientists outside the question of how many already are scientists. He writes that the number of eminent scientists will stay stable even with the rise of big science, out of the large numbers of scientists writing papers, still only a few elite scientists are more prolific and produce the majority of the papers; he finds a power-law relationship, a Pareto curve, in the relationship between the number of scientists who publish most papers (43). He tries to tie general measures of intelligence into his discussion to estimate what percent of the total population could be scientists (8% Also, gross), and still finds that even within that narrow group, only 1 in 25 actually become scientists, so in that sense, even with big science, there is still a large proportion of unused potential scientific talent. The talents of women (he mentions them) and minoritized people (he doesn’t) are wasted in the current system, but Price says that since we’re approaching saturation anyway, and increasing the number of scientists won’t increase the number of eminent scientists (who must already find ways into science and to rise to eminence) why bother (54) (double gross). He says that in general, there is an “essential, built-in un-democracy” in the uneven production of papers and distribution of talent between the fields (59).3: invisible colleges and the affluent scientific commuter
Price takes on topic of scholarly discourse and investigates how scientists must keep up with each other’s findings and lay claim to findings of their own. In the stand-out bold claim of the book, he says that scientific papers are not designed to be tools of communication, but “a social device for establishing intellectual property”; disseminating findings is secondary in publishing papers. In Price’s argument, he argues that scientists are inevitably in danger of discovering the same thing as someone else, so scientific papers become ways of staking a discovery as one’s own.
Then his next question is to ask how scientists can possibly keep up with the onslaught of everyone else’s papers to stay ahead of the curve, when everyone in continuously publishing papers that are not necessarily written as tools of communication. Then, deciding which papers to read, and which journals to read them in is a matter of trying to determine which ones are the most important by virtue of the number of citations and attention that it receives, but we also don’t want the power-law to run away and have mediocre papers getting read because everyone else is reading them while overlooking good ones. How then does science let the best papers rise to the top (getting the most citations) while preventing wastage? Price sees a few feedback mechanisms: 1) Professional societies where scientists will know each other enough to get a sense for who is good and who is not 2) collaboration, scientists who are really good can direct the activities of the okay ones to produce strong papers 3) conferences to encourage person to person communication. All three of these activities together constitute what price sees as the invisible college. I haven’t read this chapter carefully enough to know that these three are the only elements of the invisible college. I could reread this chapter if need be; it was really good. On the whole, though, he has some amount of faith in the social and professional networks in science to help along the fair apportioning of attention and eminence.4: Political strategy for big scientists
This chapter tries to address and discuss the different traits and personhood of scientists under little science and big science, but it’s also a comparative study of the pace of science development in different nations. In the little science era, before science infrastructures are set-up, only the singularly talented scientists had the drive and ability to become scientists. Under big science, in well-established science ecosystems, as there is a pre-determined path for becoming a scientist with more available resources for doing so, more people become scientists, including the people who would have been scientists already but allowing more mediocre people to become scientists (triple gross, Price). This explains how the number of eminent scientists apparently stays stable even as the total population of scientists grows, and why the growth of scientific developments starts to slow down in the big science countries, while scientific development skyrockets in developing nations. This chapter was weird.  

#### Relevant (analytical/critical) notes


#### Quotes

