## The shock of the old: technology and global history since 1900

#### Authors: David Edgerton
#### Date of Publlication: 2007

#### *Citation*
Edgerton, D. (2007). The shock of the old: technology and global history since 1900. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press.Overview:


#### Descriptive Summary

David Edgerton’s Shock of the Old
I wrote all this in the conclusion, but I think it’s fine to go up in the overview:
A fantastic line, “To have technology or science is, it is often deeply felt, to create something new. The answer to such concerns that is implicit in this book is that all countries, firms, and individuals, with area and unusual exceptions, have relied on others to invent, and have imitated more than they have invented” (209). This is Edgerton’s good response to genius claims and the narrative of western invention and subsequent global adoption. Invention happens all the time, and it’s not really invention, but some combination of imitation and adaptation of pre-existing old technologies. And Invention isn’t crucial when old technologies are oftentimes still effective for the necessary purposes and will stick around a long time. When “old technologies” are still in consistent and wide use and critical to the smooth (or smoothish) functioning of the world etc. are they really “old” at all?Chapter summaries:1: Significance
By way of an opening into his more detailed argument, Edgerton grapples with figuring out how to assess significance for various technologies—maybe better to say relative significance for technologies. He describes how significance is commonly understood, focusing on ~new inventions that changed the world~ and he argues that the popular understanding of significant inventions is a kind of publicity feedback loop, where people ascribe significance to big inventions that are talked about a lot as significant (does that make sense?). This feedback loop that doesn’t actually capture significance at all, does not capture the technologies that people widely use, which is a much more idiosyncratic group of technologies2: Time
Against timelines that claim that technology is advancing and that new technologies displace the old. Not true, lots of technologies that are considered “old” are still in wide usage long after timelines seem to say that they’ve been supplanted e.g. horses are major part of WW1. Edgerton argues for seeing lots of technologies occupying the same time, horses alongside cars, and builds case that technologies are not old/net or uptodate/outofdate, but different. Focus on newness also erases poor nations as sites where technologies are developed and used and erases the inventiveness of people of color living in those nations.
Introduces idea of creole technology (43); creole technology refers to the recombination and reworking of initially imported technologies to serve local uses—the creole technologies are inventions—he’s talking about things like important and widespread use of corrugated iron and complex types of bicycle building and repair and repurposing into rickshaws and things. Whether Edgerton is still being a little condescending is the subject of some debate—I’m not sure about it myself, because he still describes the corrugated iron and bicycles etc as imported technologies… and it also feels off that some of his examples of poor nation technologies are things like “the flying toilet” (wtf).
I think the most interesting direction that he could have taken the discussion of creole technology would be to point out the way that things in the western world that are seen as singular inventions were actually also the repurposing of other technologies imported from other placesàall invention is creole, but imperialism + eurocentricism  will call things invented by white americans and Europeans inventions while denying the label to things invented by others. He didn’t say that though…I did! Suck it, Edgerton3: Production
The problem with tech-centered ideas of production is that they leave out household production and other types of unpaid production and small farms. In this chapter too, He spends spends a lot of time unpicking popular narratives of production. The traditional narrative about the evolution of our modern, productive economy is understood as a progression from agriculture àindustry àknowledge workà service. This progression is supposedly driven forward by innovation, but Edgerton says that it’s not. He undermines this narrative by summarizing Cowans’ More Work for Mother, and discussing the kind of mass individual production of clothing that happened with the wide marketing and use of the sewing and spinning machines, which were both very long lived technologies—in this way, clothing resists the traditional narrative of industrial production to some extent. The service industry is not new, but forms of labor that were usually done inside the home are being done now outside it. Furthermore, the economy is not dematerialized because there are more service and knowledge work4: Maintenance
Nathan says that this book touched off the trendy new-ish field of maintenance studies. Edgerton points out that most work in technology is done around the maintenance of technological systems. The focus should be on maintenance, not innovation. Discusses a ton of examples in this chapter. I didn’t read it this time through.5: Nations
Technonationalism! “Technonationalism assumes that the key unit of analysis for the study of technology is the nation: nations are the units that invent that have R&D budgets, cultures of innovation, that diffuse, that use technology.” This ideology informs a lot of historical studies of technology, and it’s super-unproductive that as the lens of analysis to seeing why X nation was destined to excel at Y, because most nations use similar technologies. There’s actually “no clear positive relationship between national innovation and national rates of growth” (113) techno-globalism is the flipside of that coin, and it’s also wrong. I don’t remember what Autarky is, and it probably wasn’t clear when I did read about it a year or so ago.6: War
The conventional story of war is that civilian technology was mobilized in the war, and that there is some kind of neat division between rational, enlightened science that makes the technology, and nationalism and war that use the technology for destruction. There’s also a belief that war can be intransigent to new technologies from the civilian field that would be much more effective. Edgerton says wrong on both counts. Most technology is commissioned by war to some extent, and that the apparently “old” technologies actually do most damage (small arms, disease, famine), moreso than apparent innovations.  However, there’s also a paradox: new troop arrangements for avoiding getting shot decrease the death and injury toll, even as the number of guns in war increases (147).7: Killing
Chapter about war, the Holocaust, DDT, and the meat industry.8: Invention
Edgerton always starts with the narrative that everyone is totally wrong about. This narrative goes that academic science discovers things that inventors and industry people use as the basis for invention, and that there are particular research fields at different times where all the new discoveries are happening. Not so, Edgerton says that most invention takes place in the world of use, and that academic research is often studying developments from industry and regular use. Invention is also not the exclusive domain of a few hot fields. Catchy thing: “development not research, not research and development” (198)Conclusion
A fantastic line, “To have technology or science is, it is often deeply felt, to create something new. The answer to such concerns that is implicit in this book is that all countries, firms, and individuals, with area and unusual exceptions, have relied on others to invent, and have imitated more than they have invented” (209). This is Edgerton’s good response to genius claims and the narrative of western invention and subsequent global adoption. Invention happens all the time, and it’s not really invention, but some combination of imitation and adaptation of pre-existing old technologies. And Invention isn’t crucial when old technologies are oftentimes still effective for the necessary purposes and will stick around a long time. When “old technologies” are still in consistent and wide use and critical to the smooth (or smoothish) functioning of the world etc. are they really “old” at all?
#### Relevant (analytical/critical) notes


#### Quotes

